---
title: Rapidly innovating to produce timely data on violence against women
date: 2022-03-16
description:
  While we just celebrated International Women's day, we recognize that women
  continue to face many inequalities and challenges – including rising violence.
  A recent report by UN Women produced new survey data confirming the "shadow
  pandemic" that is violence against women (VAW).  In a conversation with
  Jessamyn O. Encarnacion, who is the Inter-Regional Advisor on Gender
  Statistics at UN Women, we find more about how innovations have helped produce
  the numbers behind this report.
tags:
  - data-solutions
---

While we just celebrated International Women's day, we recognize that women
continue to face many inequalities and challenges – including rising violence. A
recent report by UN Women produced new survey data confirming the "shadow
pandemic" that is violence against women (VAW). In a conversation with Jessamyn
O. Encarnacion, who is the Inter-Regional Advisor on Gender Statistics at UN
Women, we find more about how innovations have helped produce the numbers behind
this report.

**ISWGHS:** Welcome Jessa! We have just celebrated International Women’s Day. We
also, however, recognize that women continue to face many inequalities and
challenges – including rising violence. A recent
[report](https://data.unwomen.org/sites/default/files/documents/Publications/Measuring-shadow-pandemic.pdf)
by UN Women produced new survey data confirming the “shadow pandemic” that is
violence against women (VAW). I understand that these VAW rapid gender
assessments ([VAW RGAs](https://data.unwomen.org/publications/vaw-rga)) have
been conducted via telephone interviews. But it has been
[said](https://www.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2020/07/decision-tree-data-collection-on-violence-against-women-and-covid-19#view)
before that it is not a good idea to remotely collect VAW data mainly because
women may be at home with their abusers and the interview may result in more
violence or in poor quality data. So, what was the thinking behind in pursuing
and leading VAW RGAs?

**Jessa:** Before anything else, I must also say that we must continue to
celebrate women and girls everywhere! And thank you for raising a very valid
question. While we fully recognize the risks of collecting VAW data, **we also
equally recognize the dangers of not having the data.** So, with funding support
from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, we conducted a study which
challenged commonly held beliefs and assumptions on remote VAW data collection
but also provided assurance considering the ethical considerations in its
collection. We recognized that not only do we need evidence on the VAW situation
during the pandemic, but also **empirical evidence whether we really cannot
collect VAW data remotely in a safe and ethical manner.** And to these, UN Women
responded by **innovating.** For example, we had to change the way we collected
data as we could not do face-to-face interviews, how we asked sensitive
questions over the phone, how we ensured the safety of the respondents when we
could only hear their surroundings. This was done with Ipsos, our survey
research partner.

**ISWGHS:** Can you give us some examples of the innovation you just mentioned?
What have you done that made telephone interviews work to collect data for such
a sensitive topic?

**Jessa:** Examples of and findings from our innovations are offered as
recommendations in a
[Guidance](https://data.unwomen.org/publications/measuring-shadow-pandemic-collecting-VAW-data-guidance)
based on our field operations experience in 13 countries. To highlight a few –

The **survey _intentionally_ captured the experiences of women over 49 years,**
not often covered in regular health surveys with VAW module. When we faced
difficulty in reaching older women aged 60+, we used additional contact
databases and prioritized age quota completion over regional quota completion.

To build respondent’s trust and ensure their comfort, we asked **less-sensitive
questions first** then eased into the more sensitive questions on VAW. We also
used **simple response categories** with neutral answers such as “yes”, “no”,
“agree”, “disagree”.

Understanding that women might be hesitant to report their own experience of
violence when directly asked, we **adopted proxy measures using vignettes and
list randomization,** benefitting from
[World Bank’s](https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/35007)
experience. With vignettes, we narrated a story on partner abuse and sexual
harassment in public spaces. We then asked whether this is common or not in the
area where they live. Using list randomization questions on physical intimate
partner violence (IPV), respondents were randomly divided into two groups and
given the same short list of statements and asked how many, but not which,
statements are true. One of the groups was asked an _additional statement
designed to capture experience of IPV._ The difference between the two groups
provided an estimate of IPV prevalence.

Protocols also ensured that the **speakerphone is turned off and that no one
over the age of two was present,** in accordance with
[WHO guidelines](https://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/violence/9241546476/en/).
We also set a “safety word” (a popular local food for each country) that
respondents could use if they wanted to pause or stop the interview for any
reason.

**ISWGHS:** Now, knowing that you have conducted your VAW RGAs quite
successfully, can you give me three pieces of evidence from your RGAs’
experience that counter our common myths held about the collection of VAW data
through telephones?

**Jessa:** First, contrary to popular belief, the **lowest drop-out was observed
in sensitive questions** such as perceptions of violence, conflicts in their
home, feelings of safety; and the highest on demographic, mental health, and
food security questions. Second, **women’s safety was not compromised.** Out of
16,000+ women interviewed, only 3% of the interviews were not continued because
the women were not or could not transfer to a quiet, private place without the
presence of someone over the age of 2. Only 1% had their speakerphones on and
another 1% used the “safety word”. _In all these cases, we stopped the
interview._ Third, **direct questions on VAW could be asked in remote data
collection.** After thorough deliberations with the study’s Technical Advisory
Group and with clearance from _both_ the NSO and national women’s machinery, we
piloted a direct question on VAW in Colombia. Of the 1,200+ women interviewed,
_no one_ refused to answer the question. No one used the safe word. Almost all
women exhibited no change in behaviour when directly asked about their
experience of VAW.

**ISWGHS:** Now that you have collected all this data, how will the VAW RGAs
inform the statistical and policy advocacy work of UN Women moving forward – at
the global level and with national partners?

**Jessa:** Prior to the release of the estimates, we conducted 11 regional and
national briefings with over 100 national stakeholders and heard from many of
our national partners how they intend to use the data in strategy, advocacy,
policy and programme formulation. This year, we are following-up on these
dialogues to ensure the **connection between data production and data use.** At
the global level, we will hold a high-level policy dialogue this year to discuss
ways forward for intensified data-informed responses to address VAW in COVID-19
recovery and response plans. The
[Guidance](https://data.unwomen.org/publications/measuring-shadow-pandemic-collecting-VAW-data-guidance)
on remote VAW data collection that we developed will also support and capacitate
countries in their efforts to produce more data on VAW during the pandemic.

**ISWGHS:** Now that UN Women has successfully conducted more than 70 RGAs, how
do these experiences and lessons learned influence and inform how UN Women
supports countries in data collection and capacity development?

**Jessa:** As part of the ongoing implementation of
[Women Count](https://data.unwomen.org/women-count), UN Women's global gender
data programme, we are steadfastly continuing our data collection efforts on the
gendered impacts of COVID-19 this year. Learning from the 70+ RGAs we conducted
in the past two years, we are making sure that the first conversation to be held
is with data users to **establish intended use of expressed information needs.**
We are also promoting NSO’s leadership in the data collection process.

**ISWGHS:** Thank you Jessa for this interview. As a concluding remark, any
words of wisdom from you on how we in the international statistical community,
could carry forward our work in better serving the countries?

**Jessa: Inclusiveness, innovation and data use.**

We must make sure that we include all relevant actors throughout the process
such as our national partners, other experts who have done similar initiatives,
colleagues within institutions who implement programmes.

We must challenge commonly held beliefs and assumptions. It is in innovating
that we capacitate countries that we serve as well as develop ourselves.

Lastly, it has never been about just having more data. We do our work as
statisticians to inform and influence policies and programmes. Let’s all keep
our eyes on the prize – that we are contributing to change the lives of people
we serve through the data we produce.

Thank you and the ISWGHS for this conversation and our broader partnership.

---

_Jessamyn O. Encarnacion is the Inter-Regional Advisor on Gender Statistics of
UN Women’s global gender data programme, Women Count. She manages global
projects of the programme, including UN Women’s data needs response for
COVID-19— the rapid gender assessments on the socio-economic impacts of and
violence against women during COVID-19. Before that, she worked for 15 plus
years with the Philippines National Statistical Coordination Board: from an
understudy in the gender statistics sector in 1997 to Director of the Social
Statistics Office (think: gender, poverty, MDGs) in 2013 and capped her national
portfolio as interim Assistant National Statistician of the Philippine
Statistics Authority during its formative period in 2014-15._

Interview conducted by Ms. Nemi Okujagu, Statistician and supported by Ms. Haoyi
Chen, Coordinator, Inter-Secretariat Working Group on Household Surveys.
Gratitude goes to Ms. Francesca Perucci, Assistant Director of United Nations
Statistics Division, for her guidance.
