---
title:
  'National statistical offices still face disruptions and challenges as they
  adapt to a “new normal”'
slug: nso-still-face-disruptions-and-challenges
date: 2021-08-11
description:
  When the COVID-19 pandemic first broke out, national statistical offices
  (NSOs) around the world acted to suspend face-to-face interviews and asked
  staff to work from home, even though many lacked adequate technology for
  remote work.
images:
  - ./chart1.png
  - ./chart2.png
tags:
  - ensuring-continuity
---

import Img from 'gatsby-image';
import { Box } from '@undataforum/gatsby-theme-theme-ui';

When the COVID-19 pandemic first broke out, national statistical offices (NSOs)
around the world acted to suspend face-to-face interviews and asked staff to
work from home, even though many lacked adequate technology for remote work.

Now, more than a year into the pandemic, the effects on national statistical
offices are far more extensive and long-term than initially anticipated, even
despite improvements NSOs have since made in collecting data and upgrading their
information and communication technology (ICT). This is a significant finding of
the recently concluded fourth round of a global online survey that the World
Bank and the United Nations launched last year to monitor the effects of the
pandemic on national statistical operations around the world.

This
[latest survey round, conducted between April and May 2021](https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-reports/documentdetail/911901627637432764/one-year-into-the-pandemic-monitoring-the-state-of-statistical-operations-under-covid-19),
focused on technology challenges, funding, and costs of statistical operations.
It also covered difficulties related to collecting data on specific population
groups. The results show that the situation for NSOs was less optimistic in May
2021 than it was in October 2020. They also reveal large disparities in the
ability of national statistical offices in different countries to continue
operating.

**Key findings from the latest report include:**

- **More NSOs are now conducting face-to-face data collection.** Globally, 44
  percent of NSOs resumed face-to-face data collection as of May 2021, compared
  to only 4 percent a year earlier. This figure is higher for NSOs in low and
  lower middle-income countries, where two-thirds of the NSOs have returned to
  face-to-face data collection, compared to only one-third in high-income
  countries.

- **The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic varies across types of NSOs
  operations.** Surveys and censuses have been the most affected operations,
  while the maintenance of statistical registers has been the least affected. 81
  percent of NSOs in low and lower-middle income countries report that surveys
  have been delayed or negatively affected, compared to 61 percent of NSOs in
  high income countries, pointing to a more marked divide in countries’ ability
  to cope. Almost half of the NSOs in low and lower-middle income countries
  report that the maintenance of statistical registers has been negatively
  impacted.

- **One-third National Statistical Offices (NSOs) remained closed (as of
  May 2021) to either all staff or non-essential staff,** reversing the downward
  trend of NSO closures observed in 2020. (We reported in the third round of
  survey conducted in October 2020 that one-fourth of the offices were closed.)
  Increases in office closures have been observed in Asia, Europe, and in
  particular, Latin America. In Latin America, only 39 percent of offices were
  partially open in May, compared to 71 percent in October 2020. Anecdotally,
  this increase could be related to the impact of a second wave of the pandemic
  in these regions.

- **Two-thirds of the NSOs, particularly in higher-income economies, continue to
  rely on remote work.** This result suggests that there are vast differences
  across countries in the availability of internet and other IT infrastructure
  necessary for NSO staff to work effectively from home.

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[0]}
    title="[covid-19 survey report 3]"
    alt="[covid-19 survey report 3]"
  />
</Box>

- **Almost half of the NSOs report that government funding has decreased since
  the beginning of the pandemic.** Approximately seven out of 10 NSOs in
  sub-Saharan Africa, Northern Africa and Western Asia, and Latin America and
  the Caribbean experienced a decrease in government funding. Donors and other
  sources of funding have been more stable than government funding, although the
  situation has been uneven across regions. For example, 59 percent of NSOs in
  Sub-Saharan Africa report decreased funding from donors and other sources,
  compared to 29 percent of NSOs globally. At the same time, four in 10 NSOs
  report that data collection costs have increased during the same time period,
  particularly those offices in Oceania and Latin America and the Caribbean.

<Box mb={3}>
  <Img
    fluid={props.images[1]}
    title="[covid-19 survey report 2]"
    alt="[covid-19 survey report 2]"
  />
</Box>

- **Data collection on population groups of special interest has been negatively
  impacted.** Reaching migrants, internally displaced populations and persons
  with disabilities during the pandemic is a challenge for may statistical
  offices, including in high-income countries. Reduced phone and internet
  coverage was cited as the main reason for these difficulties.

These significant and ongoing impacts of the pandemic on statistical operations
are exacerbating overall persistent data inequities, particularly in low and
lower-middle-income countries, which have been hardest hit.

A further, crucial insight which emerged from this survey round is that more and
better financial and technical support to NSOs is key to combat these impacts.
For instance, 57 percent of NSOs from low and lower-middle income countries
reported that international community and donors played a relevant role in
funding necessary improvements in their ICT readiness during the pandemic.
Enhancing the stability, quality and predictability of NSOs operations should be
an immediate priority for action by governments and the international
development community.

To help address these challenges, the World Bank is launching the Global Data
Facility (GDF), which will provide a dedicated financing mechanism for
countries’ data and statistics priorities. The GDF is designed to leverage World
Bank support and catalyze countries’ domestic financing to strengthen the
quality and sustainability of national and subnational data and statistical
systems. This includes strengthening human and institutional capacity for data
collection, management, governance, analysis, and sharing, as well as use and
reuse by government and non-government actors around the world. It will support
investments to enhance trust in data and data systems and enable more and better
data use for decision-making at scale. The facility’s financing framework will
help enable the implementation of the
[Cape Town Global Action Plan for Sustainable Development Data](https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/hlg/cape-town-global-action-plan/)
and recommendations from the
[2021 World Development Report: Data For Better Lives](https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2021).
It will also support achieving the
[Sustainable Development Goals](https://sdgs.un.org/goals), including efforts to
close SDG data gaps.

**About Survey of National Statistical Offices:** These surveys are a joint
effort of the Bank’s Living Standards Measurement Study team and the United
Nations Statistical Division (UNSD), in coordination with the five UN Regional
Commissions. Earlier survey rounds addressed office closures and the disruptions
to data collection caused by the pandemic (May 2020), the extent to which
restrictions and disruptions had receded or became more widespread (July 2020),
and how the NSOs adapted to the new reality by implementing new surveys,
developing new protocols for face-to-face data collection, investing in the
modernization of their IT infrastructure, and building new partnerships (October
2020).

---

_**Craig Hammer** is a Program Manager with the Development Data Group at the
World Bank. He specializes in governance reforms, and in particular on open
government and open data initiatives. His work at the World Bank has included
strengthening laws, policies, and regulations focused on access to information,
open government data, and data-driven decision-making for improved public
service delivery to traditionally marginalized and underserved communities in
more than 30 countries in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America, South Asia,
and Central Europe. He is a co-author of the 2021 World Development Report: Data
for Better Lives, a Secretariat member for the World Bank’s Data Governance
Body, and manager of The World Bank’s Global Data Facility, which is the Bank’s
primary financing mechanism to support low- and middle-income countries’ data
priorities alongside the Bank’s core lending portfolio. He is a term member of
the Council on Foreign Relations; a member of the Society for the Policy
Sciences; a Fellow of the World Academy of Art and Science; and a member of the
Council of Editors for the Journal of Law and Politics. He has published books,
chapters, and refereed journal articles on topics including development data,
law, and governance._ [Read More](https://blogs.worldbank.org/team/craig-hammer)

_**Luis Gonzalez Morales** is Chief of the Web Development and Data
Visualization Unit and focal point on Data Revolution for Sustainable
Development at the UN Statistics Division. He is part of the Secretariat’s team
organizing the UN World Data Forum and supporting the Highlevel Group for
Partnership, Coordination and Capacity-Building for statistics for the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, and coleads initiatives in data
interoperability and integration of geospatial information and statistics for
the SDGs. Since he joined the Statistics Division in 2005, Luis has worked with
national statistical offices and international partners on methodology and
capacity development projects, particularly in the fields of economic
statistics, data quality, development indicators, and the coordination of
national statistical activities for the SDGs. He has a PhD in Economics from the
University of Bochum in Germany and an MSc in Statistics from the Monterrey
Institute of Technology and Higher Studies in Mexico._

_**Ivette Contreras** is a Consultant at the Data Production and Methods Unit of
the Development Data Group of the World Bank. She is a Ph.D. Candidate in
Economics at George Washington University. Her research is focused on
development economics, with special emphasis on migration, and survey methods._
[Read More](https://blogs.worldbank.org/team/ivette-maria-contreras-gonzalez)

_**Philip Wollburg** is an Economist in the World Bank’s Development Data Group
in the Data Production and Methods Unit. His research interests include
agriculture, poverty, and climate impacts in low-income countries, as well as
methodological aspects of and technological innovation in the measurement of key
development indicators. Prior to joining the World Bank, he worked with the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) and led a project aimed at
delivering innovative renewable energy solutions to smallholder agricultural and
fisheries communities in East Africa. He holds a post-graduate degree in
development economics from the University of Oxford._
[Read More](https://blogs.worldbank.org/team/philip-randolph-wollburg)
